Can I get admission in BCom (H), BCom (P), BA(Psychology), BA(Sociology), etc. at St. Stephen’s College?
NO. College offers no courses in Commerce, Sociology, Botany, Zoology, Anthropoligy, Business Studies, Psychology, etc.
Can I submit printed version of the admission form?
NO. College will accept only online admission forms this year. In case of a difficulty in accessing or submitting online admission form, you can visit the Admission Counseling Center in college between 10 AM to 1PM on working days
When can I get admissions forms? What is the last date for submitting admission forms? When will the interview list be out? 
Admission schedule is given on the Admissions page of the college website. Some of the important dates are: Online Submission of Forms starts on 2nd  June; Deadline for submitting completed Admission Forms is midnight, 16th June, Interview lists will be out at 5:00 pm on 18th June; sale of Admission Forms for Post Graduate Courses will start on 20th June. Completed application forms for post graduate courses may be submitted  within three days of the publication of the eligibility list by the relevant university department.
How will I come to know if my name appears in the interview list?
Lists will be displayed on college notice board and web site.
I am completely lost while filling the admission form. From where can I get some help?
Try these in the given order: Download the college prospectus and read Admission Guidelines (P No 29) carefully, check the Frequently Asked Questions page, leave a query at the college website, call college admissions helpline 011-2766-2168.
Will I be considered for admission on the basis of my predicted grades?
NO. College does not give any provisional admissions.
Is there an entrance test for BA (Hons) English?
No
Can I be excused from appearing for the admission interview and  (or) sports trials?
Personal appearance at the interview and sports trials is a MUST. No relaxation will be granted on this point.
How do I prepare for the Admission Interview?
Interview is meant to judge your academic potential and personality in an interactive one-on-one environment. It is unpredictable by its very nature. However, the following may help. Be sure of your twelfth standard subject knowledge. Brush up your general knowledge. Be honest in what you write about yourself in the admission form. If you want any of your extra curricular achievements to be noted by the interview board, then be prepared to answer questions on them too.  
I am a student from the OBC category. What reservation benefits can I avail?
There are NO reservations for OBC students in St. Stephen’s College.
I am a non-Christian SC/ST. Is there any reservation for students like me?
Eight and an half percent of seats in all courses are reserved for non-Christian SC/ST. Upto fifteen percent relaxation in interview cutoff percentages will be given to all reserved category applicants.
I am a physically challenged student. What reservation benefits and other special treatment can I expect at St. Stephen’s College?
Three percent of seats in all courses are reserved for Persons with Disability. College building infrastructure is disability friendly. Special library facilities are available for visually challenged students. Social Service League of college runs a number of support programmes for physically challenged students. College has an Enabling Unit and Equal Opportunity Cell which look after special needs of PwDs. Following the guidelines of University of Delhi, PwDs are excused from paying tuition fee and get concession in residence fee.
My sport does not appear in the list of sports for which trials will be held. 
Sorry, you will not be considered for admissions under sports category
I’ve done my plus two from a foreign examination board, but I am an Indian national. What should I do to apply?
Confirm if your examination appears on the list approved by the Association of Indian Universities (http://www.aiuweb.org). This list is also available at the University of Delhi website (http://www.du.ac.in). You can apply directly if your examination board appears in this list. If not, get an equivalence certificate from AIU.

