 PRESS RELEASE

ST. STEPHEN’S COLLEGE : ADMISSIONS 2014

In view of the guidelines notified by the University of Delhi on June 28, 2014, St. Stephen’s College notifies all concerned as follows-

 1.     All applicants selected for admission to undergraduate courses shall be admitted now only to the 3-year degree programme, the FYUP having been formally annulled by the University. Those who may have objection to this change-over, on the ground that they had applied for the FYUP courses, are free to refuse the offer of admission. Selected candidates are advised that accepting admission amounts to a voluntary acceptance of the 3-year degree programme of the University of Delhi.

2.     St. Stephen’s College, having been permitted by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, to have its own selection procedure, under Article 30(1) of the Constitution, had continued with the selection process, including interviews, and put up lists of provisionally selected candidates. The ‘provisional’ nature of selection was meant to preserve the margin for compliance with the guidelines of the University at a time when several issues were undecided. Now that the University has instructed that “courses and seats” to be offered shall be as they were in 2012-2013, the lists already published shall be modified and republished accordingly by Wednesday (2 July 2014) afternoon.

3.     The provisional lists already put up had incorporated the University guidelines on handicaps and adjustments about calculating BFS and PCM, as the case may be, which constitute 85% of the “composite merit” on which applicants are selected for admission. All such handicaps and adjustments having been rescinded by the University, the composite merit of the candidates interviewed shall be recalculated for purposes of finalizing the list of selected candidates. 

4.     Given the scheme of things that prevailed when the admission process in St. Stephen’s College got underway, applications for admission to B. A. Programme and B. Sc. Programme courses were not invited as they did not exist then. Now that the University has restored these courses, St. Stephen’s shall initiate the admission process. The on-line application facility for these two courses shall be open from 9 am on Wednesday the 2nd of July and last date for submitting the application shall be midnight of Tuesday the 8th of July 2014. The list of candidates shortlisted for interviews will be announced on 9th July evening and the interviews shall be held on 11th, 12th and 14th July.

5.     6 out of 50 seats in BA Programme are reserved for candidates who opt for Urdu as their optional language. They are required to have studied Urdu at least upto class X.

6.     The list of provisionally selected candidates for Economics Honours, one of the most sought after courses in St. Stephen’s College was drawn on the basis of a sanctioned strength (under FYUP) of 100. Similarly, the College had shortlisted applicants for interviews for admission to English Honours on the basis of a sanctioned strength (FYUP) of 60. In 2012, the corresponding intakes for these courses in 2012 were 50 and 30 respectively. In strict compliance with the University guidelines, St. Stephens College is now putting up a truncated list of selected candidates in accordance with the sanctioned strength in 2012. Consequently, 50 applicants who had qualified for provisional admission will now stand excluded and 30 candidates who would have been in the English Honours list will be left out.

In view of the recent queries from the media, the issue needs to be put in perspective. The College had applied to the University of Delhi, in 2011, for permission to increase the intake to these courses, in view of the fact that these two courses attract the most and best applicants from all over the country. University inspection teams had visited the college in response to these applications and satisfied themselves on the capacity of the College to cope with the increase in seats. (This has been, besides, amply demonstrated last year (2013-14) when 100 and 50 students were admitted to these courses.) The process of sanctioning these additional seats got mixed up, by sheer coincidence, with the implementation of the FYUP. The College is keen to honour the educational aspirations of the youth of India and contribute to nation-building to its utmost. The College appeals to the University of Delhi and the UGC for permission to admit 100 students to Economics Hons and 60 to English Hons. This does not affect the intake in any other course as the courses abolished to make way for the FYUP are being fully restored.

It is relevant to mention in this context that while all other Colleges were allowed to increase seats in all courses by 54% in connection with OBC reservations, the number of seats in St. Stephen’s College remained stagnant, as being a minority educational institution, St. Stephen’s college was outside the ambit of these reservations.  St. Stephen’s College is one of the largest campuses in Delhi University and its capacities need to be utilized optimally at a time when there is such a cruel mismatch between demand and supply in higher education. This will be in tune with the Government’s thrust on education as a catalyst for development.

St. Stephen’s College has renewed its request to the University of Delhi for permission to increase the sanctioned strength in these two courses. The students who got left out from the Economics and English Honours courses due to the reduction of seats, as compared to last year, shall be accommodated as and when the required sanction is accorded, provided it comes soon enough.

 

Rev. Dr. Valson Thampu
Principal,
St. Stephen’s College,
Delhi 110007     

 

Dr Karen Gabriel
Associate Professor, 
Department of English
 
Tel: 00-91-11-27662151
