 A talk by Alwyn Didar Singh to the St Stephen’s College Assembly
on Thursday, 14th August 2014

 

Introduction:

Dr. Alwyn Didar Singh, is a Stephanian who did his BA and then MA from College between 1969 and 1974. He then taught History here for the next two years before joining the IAS.

Alwyn rose to become Secretary to Government of India in the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs and post retirement joined as Secretary General of FICCI the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, India’s oldest and largest apex Industry body. Dr Alwyn Didar Singh serves as Independent Director and member on several Boards and Government advisory committees. Alwyn has the distinction of having done the first PhD in India on the Policy and Administration of e-Commerce in 2003. He was also recently awarded an Honorary. Doctorate from the University of Birmingham. Alwyn is an author and expert in IT, E-Commerce, and Foreign Trade and has several publications including three books to his credit. He is a frequent speaker on the international conference circuit, and has given talks and lectures in over 30 Institutions and countries around the world.

This is the third time in as many years that we have invited him to speak at the College Assembly.


 

LEARNING TO BE CREATIVE

Many of you will be familiar with what the title of my talk today implies (I am deliberately using the word Talk, not Lecture) and I will tell you the reason why I am doing so.

A lecture is normally perceived as a formal discourse, at best, or a rebuke or a lengthy reprimand, at worst. I am here to do neither. I stand before young and impressionable students of a renowned institution (which incidentally is my alma mater) that has produced some of India's finest and incisive minds in all walks of life.

So, what is the importance and relevance of learning to be creative in life? Those of you who have had the benefit of liberal education would know that a creative mind flows from a scientific yet free mind, which is sine qua non for development in this modern age. At a personal level the bottom line is - be creative or be obsolete!

I grew up in post independent India and went to school in the early sixties in Delhi. Childhood for me was a period when I gave admittance to a range of beliefs as this was then the norm. The focus was learning through rote. Our educational system laid great emphasis on the child to possess the qualities of hard work, persistence and resilience. Success was defined as a pot of gold that was the reward for hard work. Failure was frowned upon and was a consequence of laziness and lack of diligence. The knowledge of the student was the sole test of his intelligence or brilliance.

Every human activity be it in arts or science requires skill or knowledge. Universally this knowledge is in two parts - technical or practical. In every art or science undertaking a technique is involved. In many activities this technique or technical knowledge is formulated into rules which are deliberately learned, remembered and put into practice. Practical knowledge because it exists only in use, is not reflective and cannot be formulated in rules. This does not mean that it is an esoteric sort of knowledge. It means only that the method by which it may be shared and becomes common knowledge is not the method of formulated doctrine.

Technical knowledge can be learned from a book, it can be learned by heart and applied mechanically. On the other hand, practical knowledge can neither be taught or learned, but only imparted and acquired. It exists only in practice, and the only way to acquire it is by apprenticeship to a master not because the master can teach it but because it can be acquired only by continuous contact with one who is perpetually practising it. In arts and in science what normally happens is that  the pupil, in being taught and in learning the technique from the master, discovers himself to have acquired also another sort of knowledge than merely technical knowledge, without it even having been imparted and often, without, being able to  say precisely what it is.

Let me narrate a small story here.

This is the story of a young Chinese student who was sent from his village to study Kung Fu under a Great Kung Fu Master at the Monastery. On the very first day when he presented himself before the Master he was given a large bowl of water and told to hit the water with his hands till all the water splashed out of the bowl. This carried on for a whole year till the young boy returned home to his village for the winter vacation. There the Village elders summoned him on the evening of his arrival and asked him to demonstrate the skills of Kung Fu he had learned from the Great Master. They placed a thick plank of wood before him and asked him to demonstrate his strength. The young boy was severely embarrassed as he had not been taught how to break a plank of wood. Nevertheless he summoned up courage and attempted to smash the plank with his bare hands. With his very first blow the thick plank broke into two and suddenly the boy realised that he had acquired the mighty skills of a Kung Fu warrior without even knowing his own strength.

To me this story exemplifies the hidden facet of studying at College and quite unconsciously becoming skilled. But is that enough?

I don’t have to tell you how privileged you are to be here. You already know that. What I want to speak about is the opportunity this experience can give you in building the capacity to learn, to understand, to appreciate and to share. It must give you the ability and confidence to become creative.

Let me explain this a bit more. For example, a violinist acquires artistry as well as technique. As the musician practices he learns to improvise and become creative. Similarly a scientist acquires judgment which tells him when his technique is leading him astray, it provides him with an insight which enables him to distinguish the profitable from the unprofitable directions to explore while experimenting.

Many thinkers are beginning to question whether today’s education (the provider of technical knowledge) that lays emphasis on self-control and diligence, in fact undercuts creativity and self-awareness and in turn promotes conformity.

The rapidly changing world of ours requires immediate response to adapt through the ability to detect problems and come out with effective solutions. This calls for the present generation to be creative thinkers. How can this ability be acquired?

Incremental improvements in any activity can largely be brought about by the application of technical skills. However, revelatory transformation or a BIG BANG approach requires disruptive thinking. Here the emphasis is more on utilising practical skills and intuition, and disconnecting from the past. Starting from a clean slate with no preconceived idea on the final outcome is a pre-requisite. For instance, the Apple iPhone was a game changer. This product was not just a phone but an entertainment provider, a radio, a watch, a calendar, a camera, a GPS directional aid plus so much more - all rolled into one. And very interestingly, in the process the iPhone creatively destroyed Apple’s own successful product – the iPod!

Apple through innovation has delivered not only a wonderful product but the key to its success is delivering consumer experiences that have demonstrated true differentiation- a true test for creativity.

So what is ‘creativity’ and how does one acquire it?

A commonly agreed upon definition for creativity does not exist. Often sited definitions include: "novelty that is useful" (Stan Gryshiewicz) and "a documented effect on a relevant domain" (Howard Gardner).

One of the most respected takes on creativity is acquiring it through practical skills involving Dr Puccio’s four steps – these are clarifying, ideating, developing and implementing.

Clarifying is about defining the problem.

Ideating is Analysis of the problem through brainstorming.

Developing refers to identifying a solution. Checking to see if it works. Re developing until a solution is found.

And finally, Implementing – this involves convincing others that it has value. If this fails – please go back to the drawing board and start again!

By adopting the above iterative approach, one can become more creative in both the process and the product – hopefully a new creation.

Creativity is a process. It is much more than the single “ah-ha” moment so often depicted with light bulbs and drum rolls. Although the “ah-ha” moment is a critical component of the creative process, it is just that: part of a larger process. “Ah-ha” moments occur regularly in all four of these aforementioned stages. Although creativity is often described as “thinking outside of the box,” Puccio believes that this description is misleading. He reminds us that while Jazz musicians improvise, they are able to do so because they have “deep musical chops.”

Osho, or Rajneesh, the famous Indian professor of philosophy said this about creativity: "Creativity has nothing to do with any activity in particular. Anything can be creative – you bring that quality to the activity. Activity itself is neither creative nor uncreative. You can paint in an uncreative way. You can sing in an uncreative way. You can clean the floor in a creative way. You can cook in a creative way. Creativity is the quality that you bring to the activity you are doing. It is an attitude, an inner approach – how you look at things”.

Creativity actually cannot be defined or explained. It’s probably easier to say what it is not! It is not a talent! It’s not knowledge learnt as rote! It’s not a degree you can take! It cannot be taught in formal education! It is not related to IQ.!

In today’s world there is an information overload. Students are required to spend huge amount of time absorbing facts, information or knowledge. In addition every status update on Facebook or tweet or text message received by the student is competing for resources in her brain along with important things like how to make up with her parents who did not approve of her late night out the previous evening!

If you want to be more creative, it is prudent to split your day into project periods. Your academic assignments should be performed at a designated time; your social networking at a certain time for a given period. Creativity will increase as we reduce multitasking and immerse ourselves in a single task for a given period with full focus. Several studies have shown that a walk in the park or listening to music can trigger the mind wandering mode. This acts like a re-boot button! Day dreaming leads to creativity which can give us the ability to change our world. So when you are next out walking in the orchard and an Apple falls – immediately use it to check the iTunes Store for the latest App on Creativity!

I think that the paramount takeaway for you from your college years is how to think, think critically and think well. There is no denying the fact that learning in college is about learning new facts about the world, and storing in your mind events, formulas, texts, all of which make for an informed and literate individual.

But the point to ponder is this: Is being literate and well-informed the same as being educated? Learning produces literate and even erudite persons; Education is all about learning to be rational and creative, that allows you to critically evaluate the learnings.

The point I am trying to make is simple. Learn to learn but also learn to discern. Your education at St Stephens will enable you to use the tools of creativity. Using them judiciously will be the challenge of your truly becoming the quintessential Stephanian!

God Bless and have a good day.
