Incentives, some people say, are the best means to make someone work to her capacity. Material benefits – big pay packets, foreign holidays, membership of premium clubs, public felicitation and praise, certificates and rolls of honour – all go to make a person outperform others and even himself.  An ambitious person wants all this and a successful person gets this all.

Let us examine this statement. We love Sachin Tendulkar not merely because he is a great cricketer (because there are many more great cricketers in the world). But we in India love him because we too bask in the glory he has earned for himself. When a member of the Indian cricket team goes out in the field we all expect him to play for India, for us, for you and for me. We will all be terribly annoyed with a player who will play for himself putting the interest of his teammates and of the nation in jeopardy.  Sometimes we want our players to play for the sake of the game in true sportsman spirit, we want the best team to win, even if it is not ours.

What I conclude from this is that contributing to collective good can be a much greater incentive than mere personal achievement and reward. All focus on personal achievement can make a person very petty. The Bhagwad Gita comes out with a very interesting proposition – forget rewards, do your duty –

Karmanyevadhikaraste ma phaleshu kadachana I

Granted that we all want rewards but let us remember no reward can be obtained without action. Reward is the phala, the consequence of action. If one’s attention is riveted on reward, one is likely to mis perform. If you are sure of success you will be overcome by complacence and consequently underperform and if the reward is far and distant, you will simply surrender and not put your heart and soul into your work. Consequently the possibility of getting that reward will only recede. The ultimate irony with desire for rewards is that it makes those very rewards rather difficult to obtain. On the contrary an undiluted commitment to your work will take you through all odds, all defeats, troubles and all impediments and success will be yours. Hence, the Gita’s theory of desireless action offers a much stronger incentive for action than any incentive-based scheme.

But then why should I work if I am not to bother about my personal achievements?

Being ambitious is not to be condemned and aspiring for material progress is not to be loathed.  But what one needs to be warned against is the inability to balance personal ambition and common good.

When I say common good I do not refer to some abstract, unknown, unseen and unheard of entities.  I mean those who are really close to us. I share a common destiny with members of my family, my parents, spouse, children, neighbours, people at my place of work and not so distantly with people in my city and my country.  Whatever I do or not do impacts each one of them and similarly whatever any of these persons does or does not, has a direct and immediate bearing upon me.

Therefore, common sense demands that when I set ambitions for myself and look for rewards for myself, I should also factor in all persons with whom my life is inextricably intertwined. As a parent I should not have ambitions which will be at odds with the interests of my children. As a teacher I cannot have ambitions which hamper the interests of my students. I must know how to balance and harmonize my ambitions with the demands of my students and my family.

The Gita presents this idea in its doctrine of loka samgraha- i.e. sustaining the community. For my self is not limited to me and my person. The doctrine of the Atma in Indian philosophy is not a metaphysical construct designed to answer esoteric questions. It is a guide to practical life. Expand your vision of yourself it says, only then will you be able to live a life, fulfilled in every sense.  Have individual ambitions not caused irreparable damage to nature, to society and to the very individuals who seek success at the cost of others ??

Working for some personal gain makes one utterly selfish. The Gita says – how can you claim all rewards when actually you cannot claim all credit for success. Equity and fairness demand that  rewards must be commensurate with your efforts. The Gita mentions five factors which bring success – your overall situation in life(adhishthanam), you yourself (karta), various efforts made by a host of persons(vividhashcha prithak cheshtah, the tools and facilities available to you (karanam) and what it calls (daivam) luck - i.e. factors beyond you.   So you are just one fifth of the total causal factors which lead to success. So how can you claim 100% rewards ?

Now that you have done very well in your board examinations and have managed to enter the portals of this College, can you really claim that it was you and you alone who was responsible for your success? Such claim is preposterous; it is patently and abjectly false and reeks of extreme arrogance. Dozens of people have made this happen – your teachers, right from the day you entered your preschool, your classmates, support staff, your ayahs, servants and drivers, your parents, grandparents and uncles and aunts who have rejoiced at your little successes filling your hearts with confidence to attain greater glories. How can you not give credit to all the privileges you have enjoyed, the facilities made available to you by your parents.  And do not forget the many accidents of life which have catapulted or rather airdropped you here. These were factors you had never dreamt of, not factored in while making and executing your plans.

Hence, my friends, look beyond your personal ambition and personal rewards. These will follow automatically if you learn to give all the devils their due. Your smaller joys get subsumed under the vast joy that accrues to you when you work without the desire for rewards.   That’s the joy of doing things right, facing all challenges with strong determination and persisting with what you love for the love of it.

Dr. Ashutosh Dayal Mathur
Department of Sanskrit, St. Stephen’s College 
