  

 " Importance of Philosopher Salt " in Stephania and life

Over the course of two weeks into the College, us junior members have been introduced to a persona of great importance in our daily lives. A persona we were all oblivious to prior to our first assembly. A persona we came to know as Philosopher Salt.

 The text for the assemblies was from The Gospel According to Saint Matthew – Chapter 5 and Verse 13.

 "You are the salt of the earth. But if the salt loses its saltiness, how can it be made salty again? It's no longer good for anything, but to be thrown out and

trampled underfoot by men."

Our Principal Sir, the Revd. Valson Thampu, deliberated on the text and enlightened us regarding the philosophy of salt, the great teacher that it is. The following is a glimpse of our thoughts and reflections.

 The Gospel According to Saint Matthew – Chapter 5 and Verse 13 intricately connects the work of salt with human life by metaphorically referring to Homo sapiens as salt; it tries to define the cornerstone of human life.

A dish, prepared at home by dear mother or at a restaurant by a professional chef, requires effort. However, all this effort will go in vain if something as miniscule as salt is not added. Salt, without which the dish will be rendered bland, is the connecting link between our taste buds and the dish. The effort put in along with the ingredients used definitely makes a dish tasty but with the absence of salt, this taste shall remain hidden. Salt adds flavour to the dish and brings out the taste that lies within it. In a similar fashion, us junior members are the salt of St Stephen’s College. We are to add flavour to the college and help it connect with the world beyond Sudhir Bose Marg. Also, we are the dish to which St Stephen’s College is the salt! The College plays the part of a haven and a cataylist for us to dive into the reservoir of our potential and grow to our fullest. Thereby, bringing out the unseen qualities that lie within us and enabling us to connect with the world in a more accomplished manner. If we do not compliment each other, in the end, it will be a failure on both our parts.

 On one of the days, we were recommended the “ Dal Experiment “ by Principal Sir. The apparatus required was a small portion of cooked dal and salt. Slowly, in intervals, one had to add more and more salt to the dal. At the beginning, the dal was absolutely bland. Moving on, there was a stage when the dal could not possibly taste better as the amount of salt added and the proportion of dal cooked was perfectly balanced. Salt completed the dish at this point. This balance was disrupted as more salt was added. There upon, salt was the only ingredient that could be tasted. Who would like to have a dish that is too salty? No one. That dish would be useless. The same item, salt, which completed the dish was now discarding it as useless. It is intrinsic to human nature to settle down for the ordinary. But, if we go that extra mile, nothing can stop us from achieving the extra-ordinary and attaining completeness in ourselves and also in the things we do. The key observation from the “ Dal Experiment “ that must be applied in life is that we must know where to draw the line. Freedom without discipline is a recipe for disaster. Thus, when we involve ourselves and vie for completeness, we must be careful that we do not become greater than the cause or else there will be no difference between us and the salty dish that nobody wants, the dish that is useless.

 Another lesson we can infer from the perfect addition of salt in a dish is that, in it’s distribution throughout the dish, it does not ask for attention. It’s work is silent, unlike the tomatoes in the daal that seek to make their presence noted. It does not ask for recognition, instead does its best from a ‘measly’ position, unlike the mustard seeds that are prominent and taste bitter if ingested. By forgetting itself, it enriches the overall experience, and only one who eats a dish minus salt will value the work it does. It is vital to note, that the moment salt demands attention, the dish cannot be consumed. Salt, like every other substance, has it’s saturation point, exceeding which signals trouble. It’s humbleness and devotion is what makes it so successful. This induces an obvious deduction in our lives: Must we not do our work, without seeking praise, or crass attention? Must we exceed our saturation points, and attempt to subdue and step over the other ingredients in order to reach our goals? Quoting Confucius “Don’t be concerned about others not appreciating you, be concerned about not appreciating others.”

Again, when salt is added to a dish, it does not restrict itself to a specific corner. Rather, it uniformly spreads throughout the dish, connecting, bonding and adding flavor. The main difference between St Stephen’s College and other colleges is that we believe in a holistic development of a person. To achieve this ideal, equal emphasis is laid on extra-curricular activities as well as academics. After all, only 50 % of enlightenment is attained inside the walls of a classroom and the remaining 50 % outside. Extrapolating from the teachings of Philospher Salt, we learn that it is essential to indulge in activities that will enable us to become a multi-faceted individual. If salt limited itself to one area, it’s taste would become too strong, and difficult to digest. We should therefore, not constrain ourselves, to the mainstream and mechanical patterns students of today are expected to live. Performance in academics is only a part of the whole. It is essential that we strive for a wholesome development. Thus, being the salt of St Stephen’s College, junior members are encouraged to join the activities of various societies that abound on campus. Not only are we motivated to maintain a level of academic brilliance but also be actively involved on the sports field.

Salt as a metaphor connects the quintessential poles of human existence - our mind, our soul and the environment we inhabit. In today’s day and age of consumerism, in the rapidly changing and technologically driven world we live in, everyone seems to be lost in their lives.  So lost that we are completely isolated with the world around us. All that people seem to care for is fulfilling their materialistic desires. The growing disparity between the haves and the have-nots only accentuates this fact. Consumed by consumerism, we are losing the bond we share with our soul, with the environment and mother Earth. The green grass, the trees, the birds chirping, the blowing wind, they all have a story to tell. We only need to keep our ears open to listen, our eyes open to observe and our mind, heart and soul open to appreciate. We must be the salt and bond! If we do not bond, we are on the path of self destruction. Only when we connect will beautiful things happen. It is in the beauty of human existence to be the salt of the earth, to connect, to be kind to our surroundings and inclusively develop a deep sense of appreciation and understanding of planet earth.

Naturally, we all take a number of things for granted and therefore, often dismiss daily happenings of life to be unimportant and seek extraordinary adventures to satisfy our adrenalin rush. However, it is the mosaic of simple acts and experiences that gives life meaning just as the addition of salt in a dish unifies the different ingredients, making the dish sing aloud.

Indeed, Professor Salt has raised pertinent issues, and these questions are the need of the hour, to not only understand ourselves but also, to serve the society its betterment, and our lives for the greater glory of God. For this, we thank Professor Salt for his words of wisdom. As students of St Stephen’s College, we must endeavor to imbibe similar qualities as salt – common yet special to make a difference in the world and become better people.

In conclusion, a last thought.

Consider the possibility of salt not being salty, not inheriting these various properties. What use is it of then?

 The answer is simple.

 None whatsoever.

 

Nirbhay Nitya Nanda
(B.A. Programme )
